# Operating Systems

### Thread vs Process
A thread is a light weight process and forms a basic unit of CPU utilization.
A process can perform more than one task at the same time by including multiple threads.
A thread has its own program counter, register set, and stack.
A thread shares with other threads of the same process the code section, the data section, files and signals.

A process is a program under execution. The value of program counter (PC) indicates the address of the current instruction of the process being executed. Each process is represented by a Process Control Block (PCB).


### Critical section 
1. mutual exclusion: if a process is executing in its critical section, no other process can enter.
2. progress:
3. bounded waiting


### semaphore
a value that is accessed only through two atomic operations: wait() and signal().
1. counting semaphore
2. mutex


### deadlock
1. mutual exclusion
2. hold and wait
3. no preemption: a resource cannot be taken util it has been released
4. circular wait

### Virtual memory

The idea of VM is to use disk to extend RAM. Running processes don’t need to care whether the memory is from RAM or disk.

A page is a block of virtual memory.
A frame is a block of physical memory or random access memory.
A page table is a mapping between a page to the frame

### Copy-on-Write(CoW)
If a resource is duplicated but not modified, it is not necessary to create a new resource; the resource can be shared between the copy and the original. Modifications must still create a copy, hence the technique: the copy operation is deferred to the first write. By sharing resources in this way, it is possible to significantly reduce the resource consumption of unmodified copies, while adding a small overhead to resource-modifying operations.

### epoll
epoll is a Linux kernel system call for a scalable I/O event notification mechanism, first introduced in version 2.5.44 of the Linux kernel mainline. Its function is to monitor multiple file descriptors to see whether I/O is possible on any of them. Equivalent in FreeBSD is `kqueue`.
