# Database

### Transaction:
A sequence of db operations performed as a single logical unit of work.

### ACID:
- atomicity : a transaction must be an atomic unit of work. either all of them are performed or none of them.
- consistency: a transaction must leave all data in a consistent state, that is, maintain data integrity.
- isolation: modifications by concurrent transactions must be isolated from each other.
- durability : a transaction’s effect is permanently saved in place in the system.

### Keys
- Super: a set of attributes of a relation schema upon which all attributes of the schema are functionally dependent. No two rows can have the same value of super key attributes.
- candidate: the minimal/least subset super key.
- primary: one of the candidate key.  there can be only one primary key in one table.
- foreign: a field that uniquely identifies a row of another table.

### PRIMARY vs. UNIQUE
primary cannot have null, can only have one in a table.
unique can be null, can have multiple in a table.

### Database normalization:
a process of analyzing the given relation schemas based on their functional dependencies to achieve:
1. minimizing redundancy
2. minimizing the insertion, deletion, and update.

### Terms
- SQL: structured query language
- DDL: data definition language. SQLs like CREATE, ALTER, DROP and RENAME
- DML: data manipulation language . SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE
- DCL: data control language. GRANT, REVOKE.

### HAVING vs. WHERE
- having: a condition for a group or an aggregate function used in select statement.
- where:  selects before grouping.
- having: selects rows after grouping.

e.g. print duplicate rows.
```sql
SELECT name, section FROM tbl
GROUP BY name, section
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1
```

### View
A virtual table based on the result-set of an SQL statement.
```sql
CREATE VIEW view_name AS
SELECT column_name(s)
FROM table_name
WHERE condition
```
- can represent a subset of the data contained in a table.
- can join and simplify multiple tables into one single virtual table, acts as aggregated table.
- hide the complexity of data.
- takes very little space to store. only the definition of the view, not a copy of data.
- can provide extra security based on the engined used.

<b>materialized view</b>
disk based and are updated periodically based upon the query definitions, must be synchronized with its associated base tables.

<b>dynamic views</b>
virtual only and run the query definition each time they are accessed.

### Index
a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table at the cost of additional writes and the use of more storage space to maintain extra copy.

clustered and non-clustered index
- clustered index is the index according to which data is physically stored on disk.
- non-clustered index does not define physical data order but logical order. normally b+ or b- tree.

### CHAR vs. VARCHAR
- differ in storage and retrieval.
- CHAR column length is fixed while VARCHAR length is variable.
- maximum num of chars CHAR can hold is 255. VARCHAR ups to 4000.
- CHAR is 50% faster than VARCHAR.
- CHAR uses static memory allocation while VARCHAR uses dynamic memory allocation.

### Lock Models
- <b>Shared lock</b> is a row-level read-only lock. two transactions are granted read access.
- <b>Exclusive lock</b> allows only one user /connection to update.
- <b>Update lock</b> the main difference between exclusive and update is that you can acquire an update lock when another user already has a shared lock on the same record.

### Locking strategies
- <b>Pessimistic Locking</b> is an approach where an entity is locked in the database for the entire time when it is loaded by application. A write lock indicates that the holder of lock intends to update the entity and disallows anyone from reading, updating or deleting it; A read lock indicates that the holder intends to read the entity and does not want it to be updated during the lock.The scope of a lock could be the entire database(database lock), a table(table lock), a collection of rows(page lock), or a single row(row lock).
- <b>Optimistic Locking</b>  is that you accept the fact that collisions occur infrequently, and instead of trying to prevent them you simply choose to detect them and then resolve the collision when it does occur. 
There are two basic strategies for determining if a collision has occurred:
1. Mark the source with a unique identifier.  The source data row is marked with a unique value each time it is updated. At the point of update, the mark is checked, and if there is a different value than what you originally read in, then you know that there has been an update to the source. There are different types of concurrency marks:
- Datetime stamps (the database server should assign this value because you can’t count on the time clocks of all machines to be in sync).
- Incremental counters.
- User IDs (this only works if everyone has a unique ID and you’re logged into only one machine and the applications ensure that only one copy of an object exists in memory).
- Values generated by a globally unique surrogate key generator.
2. Retain a copy of the original.  The source data is retrieved at the point of updating and compared with the values that were originally retrieved. If the values have changed, then a collision has occurred. This strategy may be your only option if you are unable to add sufficient columns to your database schema to maintain the concurrency marks.
- <b>Overly Optimistic Locking</b> With the strategy you neither try to avoid nor detect collisions, assuming that they will never occur.

### Isolation level
- <b>Serializable</b> transactions are isolated to each other.
- <b>Repeatable reads</b> data cannot be updated during read.
- <b>Read committed</b> data being read can be updated by another transaction. Can cause Non-repeatable read.
- <b>Read uncommitted</b> a transaction can read uncommitted data of another transaction. Can cause dirty read.

### Concurrency issues
- <b>Dirty read</b> read uncommitted data
- <b>Nonrepeatable read</b> data changed during read.
- <b>Phantom read</b> new data has been added during read.

### Multiversion concurrency control (MVCC)
MVCC is a concurrency control method to provide concurrent access to database by keeping multiple copies of each data item. Each user connected to the database sees a snapshot of the database at a particular instant in time. Any changes made by a writer will not be seen by other users of the database until the changes have been completed (or, in database terms: until the transaction has been committed.)

