# Interview Last Minute Note on Java
### Heap and stack
- Stack in Java is used for static memory allocation and the execution of a thread. It contains primitive values that are specific to a method and references to objects that are in a heap, referred from the method.
- Heap space in Java is used for dynamic memory allocation for Java objects and JRE classes at the runtime. New objects are always created in heap space and the references to this objects are stored in stack memory.

### Pass-By-Value
Java is pass-by-value not pass-by-reference.

### Can you swap primitive value in a method?
No.

### Autoboxing/unboxing
Autoboxing is the automatic conversion that the Java compiler makes between the primitive types and their corresponding object wrapper classes.

### why no multi-inheritance
To avoid ambiguity error. But through interface, multi-inheritance is possible.

### Overloading and overriding
- Overloading means java allows class to have multiple methods with same method name but different arguments.
- Overriding means child class can rewrite the method from parent class.

### Static methods cannot be overridden
### Encapsulation
Encapsulation in Java is a mechanism of wrapping the data (variables) and code acting on the data (methods) together as a single unit.
### immutable class
Declare the class as
```
public final class Foo {  }
```

means it cannot be extended,  all fields are private and can only be assigned once, all getter methods are provided, performing clone of objects returns a copy rather than the reference.

### Marker interface
An interface with no fields or methods.

### Serialization
Serialization is the process of converting an object into a stream of bytes to store the object or transmit it to memory, a database, or a file. Its main purpose is to save the state of an object in order to be able to recreate it when needed.

### Keyword transient and volatile
- Volatile tells the JVM that writes to the field should always be synchronously flushed to memory, and that reads of the field should always read from memory.
- Transient means that when you serialize an object, it will return its default value on de-serialization.

`transient` does not work with `static`, `volatile` does.

### cloneable interface
It indicates `Object.clone()`, which returns a bitwise copy of the current object.

### an interface implements another interface
Not `extends`.

### default methods
default methods are defined in interfaces to provide backwards compatiblilty.

### unchecked and checked exceptions
- checked exceptions are direct subclasses of `RuntimeException`.
- Unchecked are the exceptions that are not checked at compiled time. e.g. ArithmeticException , ArrayStoreException , ClassCastException

### Annotation
A form of syntactic metadata that can be added to Java source code. Classes, methods, variables, parameters and Java packages may be annotated.

### Copy-on-write
Copy-on-write (sometimes referred to as "COW") is an optimization strategy used in computer programming. The fundamental idea is that if multiple callers ask for resources which are initially indistinguishable, you can give them pointers to the same resource. This function can be maintained until a caller tries to modify its "copy" of the resource, at which point a true private copy is created to prevent the changes becoming visible to everyone else. All of this happens transparently to the callers. The primary advantage is that if a caller never makes any modifications, no private copy need ever be created.

### Functional interfaces
A functional interface is an interface that contains only one abstract method. e.g. Lambdas: Runnable, ActionListener and Comparable.

### ++ is not thread-safe
`++` is not atomic.

### Thread starvation
Starvation describes a situation where a thread is unable to gain regular access to shared resources and is unable to make progress.

### Typical design patterns
Singleton, Builder, Factory and Visitor.

### Inversion of Control
The Spring IoC container(or Spring Bean) is at the core of the Spring Framework. The container will create the objects, wire them together, configure them, and manage their complete life cycle from creation till destruction. The Spring container uses dependency injection (DI) to manage the components that make up an application.

### Dependency injection
a technique whereby one object supplies the dependencies of another object. A "dependency" is an object that can be used, for example a service. Instead of a client specifying which service it will use, something tells the client what service to use. The "injection" refers to the passing of a dependency (a service) into the object (a client) that would use it. The service is made part of the client's state. Passing the service to the client, rather than allowing a client to build or find the service, is the fundamental requirement of the pattern.

### Polymorphism
- implementing interface
- overriding parent class methods
- overloading methods in a class

## Concurrency
This is a big topic in Java interviews.
### Thread.join()
Q: You have thread T1, T2, and T3. How will you ensure that thread T2 is run after T1 and thread T3 after T2?
A: The main thread calls `t1.join()` to wait for the `t1` thread to finish.
### Lock interface
Q: What is the advantage of the new Lock interface over a synchronized block in Java?
A: The major advantage of lock interfaces on multithreaded and concurrent programming is that they provide two separate locks for reading and writing, which enables you to write high-performance data structures, like ConcurrentHashMap and conditional blocking.
### wait & sleep
Q: What are differences between wait and sleep method in Java?
A: The only major difference is to wait to release the lock or monitor, while sleep doesn't release any lock or monitor while waiting. `wait` is used for inter-thread comm along with `notify()`.
### Implement java.util.concurrent.BlockingQueue
Java BlockingQueue implementations are thread-safe. All queuing methods are atomic in nature and use internal locks or other forms of concurrency control.
```
placeholder
```
### Implement producer-consumer
### Write a program that results in deadlocks
### Atomic operation
Q: what is an atomic operation? do you need to synchronize an atomic operation?
A: Atomic operation is smallest unit of operation, and no, you don't need to sync it.

### Volatile
Q: what is volatile? how do you use it? how is it different from synchronized?
A: volatile asks the change of the variable to be always flushed into memory, and other threads also read from memory. `synchronized` holds a lock on the resource, while `volatile` does not.

### Race condition
Q: what is a race condition? how will u find and solve it?
A: Race condition means a bug in concurrency scenario, where parallel execution of multiple threads operates on the same object without proper synchronization.

### Thread dump
A Java thread dump is a snapshot what every thread in the JVM is doing at a particular point in time. To get it, run `kill -3 <pid>`.

### Run and Start
Calling `start` creates a new thread and invokes the `runnable` inside; while `run` executes the code without creating a new thread.

### Awake a blocked thread
By throwing `InterruptedException`.

### CyclicBarrier and CountdownLatch
### Immutable object
### Common problems in Java multi-threading
memory-interference, race conditions, deadlocks, livelock and starvation.

### Green thread and native thread
green threads are scheduled by VM, native threads are scheduled by OS.

### Context switching
a context switch is the process of storing the state of a process or of a thread, so that it can be restored and execution resumed from the same point later. This allows multiple processes to share a single CPU, and is an essential feature of a multitasking operating system.

### deadlock and livelock
### thread-scheduling
Thread scheduler in java is the part of the JVM that decides which thread should run.
